---
title: "AIRSS Utilities"
layout: single
classes: wide
lang: en
lang-ref: airss-utilities
sidebar:
  nav: "docs"
---

This page provides details of the various core utilities of the AIRSS package.

airss.pl
--------

This Perl script performs ab initio random structure searching. See [AIRSS Examples](../examples) for instruction in its use. Random structures are repeatedly generated by `buildcell`, and relaxed with the chosen code (the default is Castep). Type `airss.pl -h` for a list of input arguments.

buildcell
---------

This Fortan code reads annotated Castep `.cell` files, and generates random "sensible" structures from them. The type of randomness introduced can be controlled through hash-tagged directives (which are treated as comments and ignored by Castep).

ca
--

A convenient bash wrapper for the `cryan` tool. Uses the same command line options as cryan.

cabal
-----

A structure conversion tool. Usage:

```console
$ cabal in out < seed.in > seed.out

in==out : Niggli reduce
supports castep+,cell,shx,res,gulp*,cif*,psi4*,xtl,xyz(e)
*output only +input only
```

The following converts a Castep cell file to a SHELX `.res` (results) file.

```console
$ cabal cell res < input.cell > output.res
```

The following performs a Niggli reduction on a `.cell` file.

```console
$ cabal cell cell < input.cell > output.cell
```

See also: `cif2res` in the [External Utilities](../external-utilities) page.

conv
----

Converts all the SHELX `.res` files in the current directory to conventional cells. See also: `niggli` and `prim`.

cryan
-----

A general purpose Fortran program to analyse large amounts of structure data. The structures are read from STDIN, for example:

```console
$ cat *.res | cryan -s
$ gunzip -c lots.res.gz | cryan -f H2O -r
$ find . -name "*.res" | xargs cat | cryan -m
$ cat H2O-P21c.res | cryan -g
```

Experience suggests that cryan is suitable for the analysis of up to about 100,000 structures. Other techniques are required for larger data sets.

castep_relax
------------

This bash script performs a self consistent geometry optimisation of the specified structure using Castep.

crud.pl
-------

The Castep run daemon. A Perl script for high-throughput batch calculations. The `.res` files for the structures to be relaxed are placed in the 'hopper' subdirectory (`/hopper`). The `seed.param` files are placed in the same directory that `crud.pl` is run from. Successful calculations are placed in `/good_castep`, and those that fail are placed into `/bad_castep`. The script can be run as a daemon (_i.e._ continues running once the hopper is empty, and waits for more).

despawn
-------

The `spawn` and `spawn-slow` scripts record the PIDs of the remotely spawned jobs. This script can be used to halt calculations in a controlled manner.

gencell
-------

This bash script will generate a set of recommended Castep `.cell` and `.param` files from a supplied unit cell volume, and atoms contained in the cell. It is strongly recommended that this is used as a starting point for most projects.

gulp_relax
-----------

This bash script performs a geometry optimisation of the specified structure using GULP.

lammps_relax
------------

This bash script performs a geometry optimisation of the specified structure using LAMMPS.

> **Note:** This package is not currently recommended due to issues with structural optimisation.

niggli
------

Performs a Niggli transformation on all the SHELX `.res` files in the current directory. See also: `conv` and `prim`.

pp3_relax
----------

This bash script performs a geometry optimisation of the specified structure using `pp3`, a very simple pair potential code.

psi4_relax
------------

This bash script performs a geometry optimisation of the specified structure using psi4.

> **Note:** This package is not currently recommended due to issues with structural optimisation.

vasp_relax
----------

This bash script performs a self consistent geometry optimisation of the specified structure using VASP.

prim
----

Converts all the SHELX `.res` files in the current directory to primitive cells. See also: `conv` and `niggli`.

run.pl
------

This Perl script runs a batch of Castep jobs in a directory. It is useful for "polishing" your results (_i.e._ re-running low energy structures at a higher calculation accuracy for publication), and high-throughput computation in general. Failed runs are placed into `/bad_castep`.

spawn
-----

This script can be used to submit multiple jobs to the selection of machines listed in the `~/.spawn` file. For example:

```
node1 slots=8 root=
node2 slots=8 root=
node3 slots=12 root=
```

Typing `spawn airss.pl -seed Carbon` on your root node (on which it is not advisable to run large jobs) will start a total of 28 instances of airss.pl using the `Carbon.*` input files, on your 3 remote nodes. Spawn uses ssh to run the commands remotely. Password-free access to the resources in your `.spawn` file is convenient.

The alternative to `spawn` or `mpirun` is to use the queueing system of a multiuser computer cluster to submit multiple jobs. This should be discussed with your system administrators.

spawn-slow
----------

Similar to the spawn script, but uses delays to more slowly requests remote jobs. This is recommended when launching the `run.pl` and `crud.pl` scripts, which can potentially try to "grab" the same file if started all at once.

stopairss
---------

A script to kill spawned jobs. It will kill all jobs owned by you on the remote nodes—so use with care. Use `despawn` in preference.

symm
----

Finds the space group of the structure. For example, to find the symmetry of `test.res` you would type:

```console
$ symm test
```

tidy.pl
-------

Perl script that removes the output of uncompleted calculations within the current directory.
